[dramatic music]
(applause)
MATT: We found the room.
(cheering)
MARISHA: Before that, we found the bar.
MARISHA: But it was like running the gauntlet,
man. Oh, man. I'm here.
MATT: Like the original gauntlet, not like
Gauntlet gauntlet– The initial variation of
gauntlet. Yes, Marisha Ray needs tequila badly.
(laughter)
MARISHA: Liquid courage!
MATT: They say it works well. Well, hi,
everybody!
(cheering)
MATT: Apologies for the slight delay, but we are
now kicking underway to the 2017 MAGFest Critical
Role panel!
(cheering)
MATT: I guess we'll do some quick introductions. I
think some people here already know who we are, so
we'll make them very quick. Hi. Who are you?
MARISHA: Hi. I'm Marisha Ray.
AUDIENCE: Hi, Marisha.
MATT: (cheering)
MARISHA: Thank you. Thank you. First time comer,
long time lover.
(laughter, applause)
MARISHA: I play Keyleth–
(cheering)
MARISHA: The slightly awkward half-elf druid on
Critical Role.
(applause)
MATT: Yay! I am Matthew Mercer.
MARISHA and AUDIENCE: Hi Matt!
MATT: Hi guys! I am the Dungeon Master. Thank you!
Most of you know the context, and for those of you
that don't, we're just not going to explain.
(laughter)
MATT: Yeah. We're a bunch of nerdy-ass voice
actors that play Dungeons & Dragons once a week on
Twitch. The unexpectedly strange networking
phenomenon that has been you guys giving a shit is
incredible, really. Thank you guys for being the
community that made this show anywhere near what
it is! We're excited to be here at MAGFest. It's
our favorite event. I've been coming here for
years, and it's my little video game Mecca every
year that I have to come and try and visit. I'm
glad you guys could be here for that. I will also
request, as there will be various people in this
room that, one, either haven't watched the show,
or aren't caught up, try and keep any sort of
questions or discussions as spoiler-free as
possible. Please. Use as much vague innuendo as
you want to, but if it starts getting a little
intense, I'll call you on it, or Marisha will call
you on it.
MARISHA: I probably won't call you on it.
MATT: I'll call you on it. We'll be good. Anyway.
MARISHA: I'm more likely to give a spoiler than
probably anyone else in this room.
MATT: I was kind of directing it in this
direction.
MARISHA: Yeah, that was probably more for me than
anybody else. That's a true story.
MATT: Raise your hand if you have not seen
Critical Role. You are going to be so confused! I
am excited for your journey this evening!
MARISHA: Yeah, to that, I'll say: you are all
great friends. Good on you for being drug here.
MATT: You're seriously earning some great friend
points.
MARISHA: They owe you one tomorrow.
MATT: We're not going to remember tonight
tomorrow.
MARISHA: It's fine.
MATT: Well, cool. This will be primarily a Q&A.
We'll do a quick overview of how our weird show
came about and then we'll go into questions from
you guys! I believe we have microphones set up
here in the center of the room, so when we begin
to open to questions, we'll go ahead and have you
guys very calmly and respectfully line up behind
the microphones. We would like to avoid
clotheslining or pile-driving, unless you are a
Guile cosplayer, which I will allow you one
piledrive. That's the only circumstance.
MARISHA: That's true. In the 30 seconds when
people are running, you turn into lifeguards for a
second like, "No! The concrete's slick!"
MATT: "Check if he has a pulse! He's alive! We're
good!"
AUDIENCE MEMBER: It's okay. I'm a lifeguard!
MARISHA: Oh, there! We're good! We're covered!
MATT: What's your name?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Taylor!
MATT: Taylor? All right so if anyone gets crushed,
it's Taylor's responsibility.
MARISHA: It's Taylor's fault. I mean, Taylor's
responsibility.
MATT: To make sure that you're alive. Thank you,
Taylor.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I can deal with lines. It's no
big deal.
MATT: Oh great! We're set!
(laughter)
MATT: What happens if Taylor gets hurt? Do we have
any other lifeguards in here? All right. We're
good! We are apocalypse-ready.
MARISHA: This is the importance of clerics, you
guys.
(cheering)
MATT: If anyone watched last night's episode, you
really know the importance of clerics.
(cheering)
MATT: Oh man. Actually, that's a good call. We
should apologize in advance for our loopy
mentality right now. We did do our show last
night, left on a seven AM flight this morning with
a layover.
MARISHA: We tend to not leave the studio until
about 11:30, midnight-ish, anyway.
MATT: Yeah, because I have to unpack everything.
MARISHA: Then we had to pack up when we got home.
Then you have the adrenaline, so you're like, "I
can't believe Raishan! She's such a bitch!" and
then it's hard to go to sleep.
MATT: Yeah.
MARISHA: That's basically my night every Thursday
night.
MATT: Yeah. I know I should go to sleep, but this
isn't happening until three.
MARISHA: God damn it.
MATT: Well good! I'm glad you suffer with us, in
the best way. (laughter) I'm sorry.
MARISHA: Oh yeah, you east coasters.
(cheering and groaning)
MARISHA: I know.
MATT: Look, if we did it any earlier, Sam would
just be that much more late.
MARISHA: It's honestly true. We made that time
specifically because it's the earliest we can do
to accommodate Sam.
MATT: Basically, yeah. Mr. DuckTales. For those
who don't know, they announced recently the
DuckTales cast. It's amazing. Sam, our bard, is
the voice director for that series. I'm forever
jealous of him for that.
MARISHA: Hey, man. He's just slowly turning into
Mr. Disney.
MATT: I know, but they won't take him from us.
They can try.
MARISHA: Not like NBC did. (crying)
(awwing)
MATT: I'm so torn because we want you to support
her show, Blindspot, but if it doesn't come back,
we get her back. But no! Watch the show. It's a
great show, we want to support her.
MARISHA: It's really great show. But...
MATT: Selfishly, they need heals.
MARISHA: Look, it's nothing she hasn't said
herself. She's like, "Well, my D&D group, though!"
MATT: It makes me so happy.
MARISHA: I know. That's how you know you're
winning.
MATT: Or I've instilled a poor priority list in
all of my friends. One of the two.
MARISHA: Biggest job of my career-- D&D group.
MATT: What could possibly go wrong? Smash cut to
me under an overpass bridge in ten years. Slowly
rocking inside of a cardboard--
MARISHA: You'll have all of our Critical Role
T-shirts to keep you warm!
MATT: Exactly. In the nature of opening the
discussion with you guys, if you do have a
question that's burning in the back of your mind,
calmly and carefully, hopefully without a need of
the lifeguards, start making your way towards
these microphones in the front. We'll make two
lines here, and we'll alternate between either
one.
MARISHA: I love because you were so adamant about
your warning, that everyone was like--
(laughter)
MATT: That type of control only comes from being a
Dungeon Master. Yeah, this is true, actually!
Fantastic. All right. We will do our best to
accommodate as many questions as we can in the
time we have allotted for this panel, which means
we'll try and be as concise as possible with our
answers, so we can get to as many as possible. I'm
sure there will be many topics we'll ramble on for
for an extended period of time. We'll do our best
to get to as many as we can. If we don't get to
your question here, bring it up in another panel.
Even if it's completely not Critical Role-related.
It's fine.
MARISHA: It's fine.
MATT: It'll confuse the rest of our panel. You
choose.
MARISHA: Okay, yes, you! Left first.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I don't know if you can hear me.
MARISHA: I can hear you, you're good! If you want
to tilt the mic down a little bit. There you go. Yeah.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I love the show. I know you guys
are a bunch of theater nerds, which is awesome.
Yay, theater nerds. I love it when everybody gets
to sing in the show. Sam does it the most, but you
guys all jump in and it's great.
MATT: If I ever told myself, "Oh yeah, you'll be
singing musical theater on the internet in front
of thousands of people." I'd be like, "Because I
hate myself? Because I want to be hunted down?" So
thank you that we have an opportunity for this.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: If you could cast any musical
with either the cast or the characters, what would
it be?
MARISHA: If I could cast a musical?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah. If you could put on a
musical.
MARISHA: If I could put on a musical? Ooh. It's
like the power. You go first.
MATT: We all have our very deep-seated
obsessive love of Hamilton, but--
MARISHA: It's hard to do Hamilton better.
MATT: Yeah, that's the thing. I'd say, knowing our
types of humor, and our love of Trey Parker and
Matt Stone, I'd probably say Book of Mormon.
MARISHA: Yeah. God, that's such a great show.
MATT and MARISHA: (singing) And a Mormon just
believes!
MARISHA: If I was to reinvent a musical? Okay, so
you could go one of two ways, right? You could be
like, I just want to direct this and make the best
version it could possibly be, in its pure state.
Or you could turn something on its head, like a
terrible musical, like Cats? Now you're giving me
ideas! Maybe I could do a 2017 version of Cats,
and it's like Lol Cats? And it's all internet
memes? You know?
(laughter)
MARISHA: Come on! That's a good idea! (singing)
Ninja Cats do. And Ninja Cats don't. Ninja Cats
do. Ninja Cats don't! I don't know.
MATT: I feel like the cat that had the petal put
on its head, and it saw through infinity.
MARISHA: That could go into-- That's Magical Mr.
Mistoffelees, right there.
MATT: Okay, points. I'll give you that.
MARISHA: Cats. Such a bullshit answer, by the
way.
MATT and MARISHA: Kickass!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi!
MATT: Hi!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I just wanted to say thank you so
much for being you guys, and just being wonderful,
and getting me back into D&D, getting me into 5th
edition, because I'm coming from 3.5, so thank you
for that.
MATT: Awesome!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: But! My question is sort of a
merchandise question, because do you spice? Just
hear me out on this one. It's real brief. The
shirt idea is just spice with a question mark.
MATT: We've had discussions.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Please? Because... spice?
MATT: Spice?
MARISHA: Yeah, we've got plans.
MATT: We'll just put out small packets of
cinnamon. Critical Role brand spice. Or just
different spices in each package. You don't know
what you're getting!
MARISHA: Oh my god! Can we come out with Critical
Role branded spices? Like, just legit spices? I
don't know!
MATT: Oh! Or we could have a packet of suude. We
don't tell you how to use it.
MARISHA: I feel like that's a lawsuit ready to
happen. Right there.
MATT: Totally worth it.
MARISHA: Yeah. Tweet all of your complaints at
Geek & Sundry, not at us! Okay, yes!
SARAH: I'm Sarah, @ThatGamerGrl on Twitter.
MATT and MARISHA: Hi!
SARAH: I have a questions mostly for Marisha, but
Matt, since you're currently running the game, you
can do it too.
MATT: Okay.
SARAH: Female gamers know that it's difficult
being us. It's particularly difficult when you're
the significant other of the male gamer, and even
more so when your significant other is the DM.
Somehow other players don't think that you're
there for the game. They think you're there for
your boy or trying to pretend you want to be
there-- you know.
MARISHA: Sure. Yeah. All the things.
SARAH: Also, they think we have advanced knowledge
and get special treatment, all that sort of thing.
MARISHA: Yep, and "Did you make him sleep on the
couch?" How many times have I heard that one?
(laughter)
MARISHA: Anyway, keep going.
SARAH: Obviously, you've dealt with this before.
How have you dealt with it? Matt, how have you
helped deal with it at the table?
MARISHA: That's a good question. There's been a
few times, I think there was a little bit there
for a while, that even our fellow game players
were like, "Marisha, you know something!" And I
was like, "I would love it if he talked to me, you
guys, but he just doesn't."
MATT: She'll come into my office at times, when
I'm working on game stuff, and she'll be like,
"Hey Matt," and I'll be like, "Don't look! Don't
look at me!"
MARISHA: It's a little like, "Mom! You're supposed
to knock!"
MATT: Pushing maps in the corner, "(shushing)
What?!"
MARISHA: Yeah, he does, a lot. He does that. It's
all true. That's what's funny about it. Yeah, but
I've gotten that, people have been like, "Oh, is
Matt going easier on her?" and there's also
certain people who have said the opposite, of
like, they think he's being harder on me in order
to really prove that he's not being easier on me.
You know, so it's a Catch-22, but luckily I think
there's especially a lot of us who're starting to
come out of the woodwork these days, and we're
like, no, we're on the level. We're cool. We have
a pretty good separate DM-and-player relationship.
And we try to respect it.
MATT: And respect is the key, because when you
consider that a person is at the table to play the
game, they want to play it for the challenges and
the same level as everyone else does. And yeah,
you might say, "Oh, they get special treatment,"
it's like, you're disrespecting her and her
interest in being a gamer and wanting to come at
this at the same level of challenge that everybody
else is. So it's just being able to distinguish
that difference and respect as players at the
table that that's not the case.
MARISHA: Yeah, cheating's not fun. That's what
people have always said. "Do you go into his
notes? Do you sneak into his notes, into his
binders?" I'm like, no. That's dumb.
MATT: I have that shit alarmed.
(laughter)
MATT: I'd know.
SARAH: Thank you very much.
MATT: No worries, good question.
(cheering)
MATT: Hello, sir. You look so dapper.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah, I came from the bar to be
here. You met my wife?
(applause, laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: How are we doing? Drinks good?
MATT: Hi, what's your question?
MARISHA: You have our attention.
(laughter)
MARISHA: Your wife's still alive, right? Nah, keep
going.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: She took a lovely picture with
you and sent it to me while I was sitting here.
MATT and MARISHA: Oh!
MARISHA: So much more makes sense.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: No, Matt met my wife.
MATT: I was like, did I black out for half an
hour? Because I'm an asshole? Anyway, you had a question?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Well, first off, I just wanted to
thank you guys very much-- or blame you guys, I
don't know. I'm currently in five games, co-DMing
two, DM-ing one. I blame you mostly.
MATT: I am sorry, and you're welcome.
(laughter)
MARISHA: You just read that off like major-league
baseball stats.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I had to compute it, because
people are like, "Hey, do you have room for a
game, blah-blah-blah," and I was like, "No." But I
just wanted to-- it's a thank you, mostly. It's
been great. And being back into RP is just
awesome.
MATT: Welcome back. And let me tell you, how long
have you been playing, approximately?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: See, that's the thing. When I was
a kid, Boy Scouts, I stole one of the 2nd ed, I
think it was Gods and something books from one of
my friends.
MATT: Deities and Demigods.
MARISHA: Good for you. It was better off in your
hands.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: But I never got to be in games
when I was that age. There was just nobody around.
MATT: But that's the thing, though. We're going
into an age now where not only is the game more
accessible to a larger audience, but there's less
of that stigma to discuss it, and people are more
interested in either getting back into it or
finally learning what it actually is, and it's
actually a lot of fun. When I grew up, like you
said, you're in five games now. That would be
insane to me when I was 14!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Well, it's insane now, don't
worry.
MATT: Yeah, it was like spotting a UFO, you're
like, "Wait, wait. You know somebody else who
"plays D&D? You don't want to join our group? No?
That's fine."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I've already gotten the question
three times this-- but no, I had a
question-question. This is with DMing. When you
have a group and they write nice backstories and
then you go and say, okay, I can create this
around all of this, and then it's like, okay, now
whose do I do and will that piss off everybody
else whose backstory doesn't time yet? Say if
someone is on a vision quest or something for a
long time.
MARISHA: Those damn vision quests.
MATT: Whose backstory do you choose? Like, what
order to go in?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah, like do you have some way
that you try to prioritize that?
MATT: I think it depends on their backstories and
considering what level of difficulty that might
come to fruition in. If someone's backstory deals
with a drug lord that crossed their family and
they're trying to get vengeance on them, that
could be a fairly low-level encounter that could
have some long-running background elements you
could tie into the future. If someone's like,
"Well, my backstory is I had one of the evil gods
devour my people on a continent that sank into the
ocean," you're like, probably not getting to that
until the later levels. So that does help at least
prioritize somewhat, at least as far as the scale
of the group's power. If there isn't that
easy-to-discovery priority list per se, then see
if there's any that you can combine, see if
there's a plot from one backstory and another that
they thought were completely unrelated that
suddenly tie into being the same group or the same
villain, or perhaps it's fate that came together
for this specific purpose. Or just tell a player,
hold off a while. Be respectful. I can't do
everybody's story at once. This is going to turn
into The Wire.
(laughter)
MATT: So yeah. That would be my biggest
recommendation. It's a hard balance, it really is.
I haven't had the opportunity to get too deep
into-- I've touched a bit on Scanlan's story and
Pike, she just hasn't been around. But the first
player to really get a heavy backstory element
after two and a half years of gaming was Percy. Up
to that point, I hadn't really tied anyone's
backstory into it so heavily, so don't feel like
it's something you have to frontload, either.
MARISHA: I think the twins kind of went first,
because their dad happened to be, like, the
president of Syngorn.
MATT: Ambassador.
MARISHA: Which is kind of like one of our
neighboring towns, so we wound up dealing with
some of their stuff at the home game. And I
remember the first time, when they were like,
"Hello, father," and we were all like, "What?!"
Because they didn't tell us that.
MATT: It was like a Maury episode, yeah.
MARISHA: Because that was the first time we'd
really gotten to anyone's backstory stuff, so we
were like, "Plot twist!" Anyway. Continue.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Well, that was the main part of
the question. Thank you. Thank you guys so much
for what you do. It's great, and I look forward to
it every week.
MATT and MARISHA: Thank you.
MATT: And good on you for taking up the mantle of
helping dungeon master other games. I can't
emphasize it enough. For so many years, I've known
people who were afraid to pick up the mantle of
the dungeon master. It is daunting, it seems, but
it's a thrill in its own right to create a story,
to create a space for your friends to play in, and
that's your gift to them, and let them live and
breathe and write stories within that space that
you created is-- there's no feeling quite like it.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah, and on the other note,
there's always the thing of, "I have all this
stuff created and I can't tell you this yet, we're
not there yet."
MATT: I know. But once you wait for the right
moment to release it and you go, "Here," and they
all go, "What?!" you're like, "Yeah." I don't know
which mic to drop. There's like six at the table.
(laughter)
MATT: But yeah, you know what I mean. Good
question.
(applause)
MARISHA: Yeah, I remember when you went to go get
drinks with Eric, who's my writer for Signal
Boost, and you were like, "Hey man, I'd really
love to go get drinks," and he was like, "Oh.
Okay, yeah, sure, man. I've never really hung out
one-on-one, I'm not sure what he wants to talk to
me about." And then his side is that you sat him
down and you were like, "Dude. Okay. Here's what
I'm planning for their campaign, and I have to
tell someone."
(laughter)
MARISHA: And you dumped the entire campaign on
him.
MATT: Yeah, I think him, Matt Colville, and Chris
Perkins are the only people that know what the
next arc in your campaign is.
MARISHA: Once again, can't talk to anybody.
MATT: I'm tempted, like, time to steal some money!
Or I'm just going to melt down.
MARISHA: Yeah, Eric came back with gray hair, he'd
seen the future.
MATT: Snow-blind, aged 40 years. He had no legs,
it was weird.
(laughter)
MATT: Next question.
SHO: Hi, my name is Sho. I started playing
Dungeons and Dragons two years ago, a little over
two years ago, in the summer. I started off as a
DM of my friends. I started off with eight people, actually.
MARISHA: You started as a DM?
SHO: I started as a DM, yeah.
MATT: Talk about training with weights on, dude.
Damn!
SHO: It lasted two days.
(laughter)
MATT: Very fast workout.
SHO: But currently, right now, I'm playing with a
very good group of people. We're playing through A
Tyranny of Dragons right now, and I'm working on a
campaign on the side that I'm also keeping locked
down and secret, you know? But my real question is
general for the both of you guys, whether DMing or
just as a player, what is your favorite monster
out of all, whether to fight or to just use?
MATT: You first.
MARISHA: I love displacer beasts, just because
they're displacer kitties. They're so cute. Oh,
you're so scary, aren't you? You think you're
scary. That's how you beat displacer beasts.
You're just like, "You're scary!"
MATT: Oh, you're going to hate them when you're
back to your new campaign at level three.
MARISHA: Yeah, totally. No, they were really hard
at level three. Also, I mean, beholders. Beholders
are iconically amazing and hard to fight and each
one is a little tactically different. I love that.
MATT: Yeah, they're hyper-paranoid, they're just
strange and dangerous. Those are fun. All of those
are good choices.
MARISHA: What about you?
MATT: Look.
(laughter)
MATT: I have yet to be able to use it in a
campaign, and when I opened the 2nd Edition
Monster Manual in my freshman year of high school
and I saw the Godzilla-like artwork, I fell in
love immediately with the tarrasque.
(cheering)
MATT: I like the idea of an entity that is such a
powerful force of nature on such a mythological
level that it just slumbers beneath the surface of
the world and emerges once every generation or so
to rise up and eat, for weeks, anything in its
path. Until eventually, it's either defeated, or
it's quelled its hunger and then slumbers back
into the core of the earth again, supposedly on an
infinite loop, for all of time. That's fun. Also,
hyper-magic resistant, vorpal bite, trample
attacks. It's fun.
MARISHA: So fun. Super fun.
MATT: Hope they never run into one.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Final boss!
MATT: Good question.
SHO: Yeah, thanks so much.
MATT: Thanks, buddy. You sir!
HEATH: Hi, my name is Heath.
MATT: Hey, Zeke!
HEATH: Heath. Heath. Like the candy bar.
MATT: Oh! Heath. I misunderstood that.
HEATH: Everyone does.
MATT: As a fan of Heath bars, I'm sorry.
HEATH: Anthony Burch, last year, he got it the
first try.
MATT: Did he really? Anthony!
MARISHA: Damn it, Anthony. Smart guy.
HEATH: My question goes to both of you. What
moment in D&D gave you the greatest impact outside
the game?
(laughter)
MARISHA: No pressure or anything.
MARISHA: It's like-- Should we know this ahead of
time?
(laughter)
MARISHA: I feel like we should.
HEATH: If it makes you feel better, this was a
secondary question. My initial question would have
gone to the excremancer, Scanlan.
MATT: Excremancer.
(laughter)
HEATH: But he's not here!
MARISHA: I'm sorry. I couldn't even attempt to
answer a question like Sam can, so I'm not even
going to try.
MATT: I would say two moments for me. One's going
to be legitimate, one's going to be a little
cheesy. The legitimate one is the moment that I
decided to become a dungeon master, as a
performer, because it was a lot of pressure, but
it also allowed me a space where I could create
and understand so many different varying character
personalities from my imagination and give them
life, give them a voice, give them a personality,
and play in that space. It helped me hone a lot of
the skills that I still use today as a
professional performer. So deciding to be a
dungeon master-- In a space where the only
experience I had was one dude who was a really bad
dungeon master, and I became one out of spite as a
reaction to his campaign. Really nice guy, but
just not that great of a storyteller. That was
important to me. Honestly, it sounds cheesy, but
the moment that we decided to do the livestream.
It went against a lot of our instincts for such a
personal game and we were like, "I don't know,
man." We all had our brushes with the internet,
and the internet being a mob of flaming torches
and pitchforks. We were like, "Okay, do we want to
set us up for this kind of heartbreak?" I think
our decision to take it to the stream and hope for
the best led to two years of this.
(applause)
MARISHA: I have one of my new revelations with
Keyleth is-- I've said this a couple times, but I
genuinely feel like ever since I've embodied
Keyleth, and especially more so since the stream
started because we play more on a weekly basis, I
genuinely feel like she's made me a more
empathetic and compassionate person. Because me,
personally, I'm more closed off and a little bit
more-- I'm more introverted. I have my social
anxieties. Keyleth helped me get that first
instinct. Because her first instinct is always,
"I'm going to do whatever I can for the betterment
of other people." That's not necessarily my first
instinct. She taught me a lot, genuinely, about
that. Then I remember even the moment that I had
with Patrick Rothfuss on stream. Which I don't
want to, like-- Once again, no spoilers.
(applause)
MARISHA: Yeah. Patrick, my new best friend. That's
our joke. He's my friend now. Because it's Patrick
Rothfuss. That moment. That was amazing because
Patrick and I didn't really know each other aside
from acquaintances before he came on the stream.
That was really the first time we had really met.
Before that episode started, he was by the coffee
machine in the lobby, in the kitchen in our area,
in our green room. He was like, "Marisha. I don't
know if I can do this." I was like, "What do you
mean, man? It's fine." He's like, "No, you guys
are so funny, and you're witty. You guys are so
quick, and I don't know." I was like, "Dude,
you're Patrick Rothfuss! What?! No-- Man, it's
going to be great. You're going to get in there
and maybe-- You'll be fine after a few minutes."
Then he told me afterwards-- This turned into a
tangent, I'm sorry. We brought him in in the
middle of the episode, and earlier that episode
Keyleth was having problems with her morality, and
the hero-worship, and trying to figure out if what
she was doing was actually helping, instead of
just that surface helping like Windex. Patrick
told me after that, he was like, "When I saw
Keyleth going through that, I was like, 'Okay.
That's where Kerr is going to have his entry
point, and that's where they can relate.'" Of
course, it's all improv. I had no idea any of that
was going to happen. That was such a
transformative moment for I think both me and
Keyleth. He really got Keyleth out of a rut after
that. That was just-- I'll never forget that
moment. Never.
(applause)
MATT: Thank you for the question. Hello!
MARISHA: Sorry, I talked for a long time on that
one.
MATT: That's okay.
MARISHA: Keep going.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. I'm going to be really
nervous. First, congratulations on your engagement.
(cheering)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Wish you guys a life of love and
happiness together. I've been married ten years,
and it's awesome. May you always roll crit 20s.
(awwing)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: You're adorable and just
inspiring. My question is for Keyleth. It's very
noticeable that you've grown and changed. I wanted
you to talk a little bit about how your
interactions with the other characters-- There's a
moment that comes to mind, with you and Vex, that
was like sisters.
MARISHA: Yeah.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Especially now that you're dating
somebody in the party. How has her relationship
with other members of the group changed,
especially now that she's in that really emotional relationship?
MARISHA: That's a great question. Keyleth has
always felt like the odd man out, you know? Once
again, she'll always go with the flow, unless she
feels like it's real bad, guys. Like, "Maybe we
should really think about this." I've had a few
people in the interwebs be like, "Why does Keyleth
always have to disagree with everybody?" She
doesn't, actually. It's just that she doesn't
really speak up a lot of the times. You're
literally only remembering the times that she
does? It's taken her a while to get that courage
to be that kind of a person. She also thinks--
It's not that she thinks. She knows-- I know--
she's the least coolest member of the group.
(awwing)
MARISHA: Come on, you guys. That's true! For Vex,
Keyleth looks at Vex and she's like, "Oh my god.
She's the It Girl. She's so cool, man." She's the
popular girl. I know the moment you're talking
about, and I remember that. Any time I think
Keyleth gets a little bit of that popular girl
attention-- The internet has also picked up on
that a little bit, too. It's just the twins, man.
They get people going. You know? She, like Vax
says-- In a weird way they're the perfect
dichotomy of each other, because Vex still has
that-- She's just such a badass. She's the Han
Solo of our group, man. She's just fucking cool.
As time's gone on, I think she's gotten more
comfortable, but maybe one day Keyleth will be
cool. Maybe one day.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: She's always cool.
MARISHA: Hey, that's her purpose. That's her role!
It's good.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: She's amazing, and thank you guys
so much.
MARISHA: Yeah, thank you.
MATT: Hello!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. Speaking of couples that game
together, my husband and I have been gaming
together for about 13 years, and we have five
games going between the two of us.
MATT: Nice! Congrats.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah, heaven help us. Basically,
a couple years ago at MAGFest they had a panel
called Beyond D&D. We learned about a few games
there. There's a lot of games out there that are
similar to Dungeons & Dragons in the mechanics,
but we then learned about a bunch of games that
are completely different. Things like Dungeon
World, where it's moves and 2d6, and Dread, where
it's a Jenga tower instead of dice. I was
wondering if you guys have played games like that,
either those two or other ones, and what you think
about those style of games.
MATT: I played a number of systems growing up. D&D
was my first introduction into RPG and will always
be my dearest, because it for a lot of people was
the introduction and the kickstart moment of the
genre as a whole. I grew up playing the Palladium
universe, for better or for worse, through Rifts,
which is broken in its own right. I love Call of
Cthulhu tremendously. Dungeon World's a great
system, actually. I've only had the opportunity in
recent years to try that one out. Exalted was fun
because you play an anime character being
ridiculous. You get more benefits for having the
most ridiculous combos, like, "That's even cooler?
Then you get more cool because you're so cool.
Because anime." Exalted is fun in that regard. A
lot of the White Wolf stuff. World of Darkness is
a lot of fun.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: We played White Wolf for a very
long time. Exalted was always great. We had that
one-shot boss where we killed him in one shot and
the GM was looking at a sheet and we were like,
"Did we kill him?" He drew three more more health
boxes and was like, "No."
MATT: That's awesome. I've played a lot of
terrible systems. I played a one-shot in a world
called Synnibarr, which is one of the worst games
ever made, and I played it because of that. It
already had that reputation and I was like, "I at
least have to try this once," and it lived up to
its reputation. It made Rifts look super
streamlined, beautiful, and cohesive as far as
worldbuilding. It was incredible. Marisha?
MARISHA: Yeah, of course we had our Pathfinder
game before we switched over. He was also my first
Dungeon Master. It was before we were dating. You
actually DMed for me and my boyfriend at the time.
That's true.
MATT: Yeah. That wasn't the intent! That was a
year and half before we started dating!
MARISHA: That's also true.
MATT: It wasn't! I'm a good boy!
(laughter)
MATT: It was very respectful. I was crushing on
her hardcore, but very respectful!
(awwing)
MATT: (pathetic horn blowing)
MARISHA: Was that a Matt Mercer horn? That's
amazing.
MATT: Shut up! Continue answering your question.
MARISHA: Anyway, we played Pathfinder. I played a
Buffy the Vampire system for a while, which was
fun. Together, if you step outside of RPGs for a
bit-- in terms of couple gaming-- we play Mansions
of Madness all the time. Mansions of Madness is
great, and they just came out with a new system
that's amazing, a second edition. We also play a
lot of Minecraft together because it's our come
home from a 14 hour day and need to zone out and
hit blocks for an hour. It's our zen thing, and
you get the nice Minecraft zen meditation music.
You're like, "This is almost like a spa."
MATT: Couples that stay in their pajamas playing
Minecraft together I think is a very therapeutic
experience for the two of you. I highly recommend
it. If it's a rainy day outside, get yourself a
cup of coffee, sit there, and be like, "Hey babe,
you want to build a castle out of this mountain?
Let's do it."
MARISHA: "Oh my god, that's the best! Yes I do!"
MATT: "Let's raise some sheep."
MARISHA: "Oh man, you get the cows. I'll get the
sheep."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: We play HotS so that I can take
over towers as Ragnaros.
MARISHA: Yeah we play WoW together too. Totally.
Good times.
(cheering)
MATT: Hello! Oh, it's Becca! Becca's our OG
Critter.
MARISHA: Hi! The light was obscuring you a little
bit. I can see you now-- can't really see you now.
I can see you now.
MATT: Just so you guys know, Becca, I think, was
legitimately the first Critter we met at a
convention after the show had originally launched.
Becca's been there from the beginning.
MARISHA: It's true, yeah.
(cheering)
BECCA: That was two years ago in March. That was a
long time ago. My question is actually about your
playlists that you guys started doing, because I
love them and I've probably listened to Vex's
first one and Keyleth's first one more than enough
times. My question is: obviously you guys make
them with your characters in mind, but I wanted to
know how much of your own personal favorite genres
and stuff like that also influence what went into
the playlists.
MARISHA: That's a good question. To preface a
little bit about what she's talking about, in case
you didn't know, all of us put out character
Spotify playlists to help give you a little more
insight into some of our characters. We did it
last year, and we're right in the middle of our
second round because, quite frankly, we enjoy
doing them so much, and we wanted to do it again.
We're all music lovers. Who's not a music lover?
This is MAGFest! Everyone here's got to be a music
lover! We wanted to do it again. You can all find
them on Geek & Sundry Spotify. I actually went
searching a decent amount for a lot of my stuff.
It definitely has a lot of my musical influences.
My dad raised me on a lot of bluegrass, and
classic rock, and folk, and things like that. I
grew up in Kentucky-- this part of the woods, you
guys! They're all songs that I love and definitely
speak to my influence of music, but still very
much have that Keyleth taste. We get really anal
retentive about them. We'll be like, "No. It's not
perfect enough. It's close, but not enough." We've
spent months on those, finding the perfect songs.
MATT: I just picked songs that I knew and liked.
MARISHA: That's not true.
MATT: No, there was a little bit of searching.
MARISHA: You had an even harder time because you
were doing the NPC playlists. You had one or two
songs per character, which is hard.
MATT: Yeah, it was like, "How do I encompass an
entire NPC's personality in one song?" I chose
elements of each, and it was hard to do. A lot of
mine were songs that I already knew or I was a fan
of the bands and picked one that fit for those
characters, and then a lot of searching as well.
I'll be doing a second list soon. Should be
interesting.
BECCA: Bangarang was my favorite one off of
yours.
MARISHA: Wait, which one? Oh, Bangarang? Oh yeah,
that's a good one.
BECCA: Thanks.
MATT: Thank you, Becca. I think we can get all
these questions done in the next seven minutes.
There's a panel after this, right?
MARISHA: Are you Gilmore?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I am!
MATT: Damn right you are! That's amazing! (Gilmore
voice) "If I do say so myself, you look glorious."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Absolutely. Actually, Marisha,
you answered my original question. Just curious
about whether Keyleth's playstyle was something
that came naturally to you or if you really had to
think about what Keyleth did. I think that
watching her growth through this series has been
such a delight. I've been binge watching, so it's
been a little rapid-fire for me. I wanted to thank
you for that. Matt, we've seen all these wonderful
NPCs come through that maybe you had a plan for,
maybe were small and got away from you and ended
up a little longer than you thought they would in
the series. I was wondering if you would share
with us a quirk, a tidbit of backstory,
personality trait that you would have liked to
work in for an NPC that never made it into the game?
MATT: Oh, that's an interesting point. Who knows,
some elements might still come in, per se. Who to
pick? It's interesting. You try to prepare as much
as you can as Dungeon Master, but the players
always inevitably go nowhere you expect. You end
up having to throw half your stuff out the window.
That's part of the fun of being Dungeon Master.
You go, "Okay, let's see where this goes." I've
been really excited that through the Marquet
journey they've got to see a bit more of Gilmore's
backstory, which is fun. Seen some more about
Allura's history and initial adventuring party a
bit, the original battle with Thordak and stuff
like that. I would say there hasn't been enough
time or interaction in Vasselheim, the Platinum
Sanctuary, and Highbearer Vord, and the history of
how Kima came under his training, and their
relationship, which is of mutual respect, but also
tenuous teacher and impetuous student. Even for as
many years as they've been working together, and
as high ranked as Kima is within the order. We
never had the opportunity to really explore that
too much and I don't know if we will, depending on
where the game goes. Maybe it will. We'll see.
Kima's always been a personal favorite of mine.
It's a character archetype I never got a chance to
roleplay too often, which was the "All right, you
guys are planning? You're taking too long. I'm
kicking the door anyway." I love that. I love the
individual that, while wise and understands and
never acts in a way that would endanger people and
is plotting well, but still gets impatient and
will push even their plot forward in a way that
will freak everyone else around them, but they
won't tell anyone that, "I got it under control."
In the end when everything works okay and they're
like, "What are you doing?!" They're like, "Oh. it
was fine I had a plan the whole time." Like, "Why
didn't you say anything?" "Forgot." Kima works in
that realm a lot. We'll see, maybe one day.
Awesome. All righty, we have a few more minutes.
We do have a panel, I believe, after this, right?
I think so, yeah. so we won't be able to stay
after. I'll try to get through a couple more
questions as fast as possible and if we don't get
to your question, like I said, come to our other
panel. Keep it in mind, and if you don't get to it
at MAGFest, maybe hit it on Twitter, or another convention.
MARISHA: Or Talks Machina.
BEN: Hi, I'm Ben.
MATT and MARISHA: Hi, Ben!
BEN: I'll make this quick. Thank you for your
amazing game, but also thank you for creating the
community of people that has surrounded here. I
met so many amazing people through Twitter, so
many of my now closest friends, because of you
guys, and I can only thank you so much for that. A
little bit of backstory to my question: my Critter
game online is hitting one year next week, and I
play an aarakocra sorcerer. My question to Matt
is: how have you, if you've even thought of it,
implemented aarakocra into your world at all? Do
they have any roles specifically within either the
Prime Material Plane or the Air Elemental Plane,
or anything like that? Or have you not even
thought of it whatsoever?
MATT: The campaign guide, as it comes to fruition
later this year, will have information about that.
They're not well-known within most civilized areas
in Tal'Dorei, the continent proper. They do exist
on the outskirts of society, and usually don't
interact on this continent too often with the
fairer races, I guess you'd say. They're a little
more common on other continents, specifically
Wildemount. That's as much as I can tell you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you!
MATT: Good question.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, quick question. You mentioned
how the internet can be a mob of angry people with
pitchforks. My question would be, how do you find
the conviction to stay true to what you think your
character would do and what your character's arc
would be, despite everybody being like, "They
shouldn't do this," or "They shouldn't be in that
situation?"
MARISHA: Much to their chagrin, I'm sure, I just
don't listen to them.
(cheering)
MARISHA: Don't get me wrong, I hear them. I feel
it, but their thoughts on how they think Keyleth
should act or respond-- I appreciate that in their
realm and what they think that that's what fits
into their headcanon, and that's fine, but I've
been with this character for almost five years
now. Like we were talking about earlier, every
decision that we're encroached with, I'm like,
"Well, I would do-- no. How would Keyleth act?
This is what she would do." There is thought
behind all of our actions. Some of them are
impulsive, but even in that moment, we've been
with these characters for so long, we know them
pretty well.
MATT: To add onto that too, characters, realistic
characters, are complicated and full of
contradictions and flaws.
MARISHA: Not perfect.
MATT: While a lot of media, you can pinpoint a few
similar traits that can explain a certain
character, and that may be true most of the time,
but there will be exceptions. There'll be points
of high duress. There'll be points of extreme
emotional pain. There will be moments of severe
fury or wish for vengeance that a character will
act out of their normal active zone. Those moments
are wonderful and human, and places you can really
identify with, as many of us have been in those
same places. On one might be like, "No, why is
that character doing this?! That doesn't make
sense." How many times have you done some things
that didn't make sense and you may have regretted
down the road? That's part of the process too. We
also understand that passion is passion. After
every episode we get that barrage of, "Oh my god,
why?!" Our first response is like, "Because!" Then
we all calm down the next day and we're like, "Eh,
it's all right."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you.
MATT: No worries.
MARISHA: Maybe time for one or two more?
MATT: One or two quick ones because we don't want
to hold up the rest of the evening. Two more quick
questions. Those we didn't get to, we're so sorry,
we have another panel. Please bring it with you
next time.
MARISHA: Yes!
MATT: Question?
JAMES: Hello. James Klaus, wizard on the coast.
I had actually a very pragmatic question for you,
Matt. How do you price out Laura's bear armor?
MATT: Oh, how do you price out Laura's bear
armor? I'd have to go back to my notes. A lot of
it is spur of the moment, trying to figure it out
based on, well, the time of an actual suit of
armor and then barding for a creature, and then
custom barding for what is a non-common creature
to have armor constructed for it would be like
double or triple the cost, and then you consider
the materials involved are rare materials, and the
quality of how they were harvested. So for that--
JAMES: Who's going to do it?
MATT: Yeah, to find somebody who's actually
comfortable doing this and rolling for them to see
if they don't end up ruining the materials, and
then like, well, here's half your money back and
you don't get anything. It can be that complicated
if you want to, or you can just say, "Uh, it's
5,000. Here's your armor." Depends on how you want
to run your game. I run in the middle of not too
overcomplicated and a little bit of just keeping
the narrative flowing. But a lot of those moments
like that, I didn't know she was going to try and
do custom bulette armor for Trinket, so I went,
"Sure! It'll cost this much and you have to find
this person." Make notes later to write down how
much the bulette armor was. You know. So, off the
top of my head, I have no idea, but I'm sure
CritRoleStats would be happy to let you know.
(laughter)
JAMES: The other thing is, after last night's
episode, I thought that maybe you guys could use
some chocolate, so I bought some chocolate.
MATT: Oh, what?! That's awesome, thank you,
buddy.
MARISHA: Thank you.
MATT: And you, for the final question of the
evening, monsieur.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Welcome. Good to have you back,
Matt. Marisha, welcome to the venue. First off,
thank you guys for both the entertainment and the
inspiration. Matt, your DMing mastery has inspired
me to start working on my own homebrew campaign in
the Witcher universe.
MATT: Oh, yes!
MARISHA: Can I just say, real quick, it sounds
like we're all going down on the Titanic for this
last question. So I just want to relish this
moment. Proceed, Green Arrow. Proceed.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Indeed. So this is more of a
pre-stream question. Having gone through the first
campaign with people like CrossFit, which blows
people's minds, has there ever been an instance
when the Crit Role campaign really started that
felt like it was going to come off the rails and
just not work.
MARISHA: Like, when we started streaming? Oh,
before stream.
MATT: It's hard to do that when-- well, I've been
gaming for a long time, and it comes with
experience to learn how to bullshit your way to
get things back on the rails. It may be by the
seat of your pants, but as long as your players
are having a good time, it's better to let them
guide that to that point. So even if it's
completely away from your story and you're like,
"All right, I wrote three hours of story that
we're never going to see, that's fine." If the
players are having a good time, you just let them
roll and see where the story finds itself at that
point. If you can find a way to connect it back,
try to. If not, finish the session, "Thanks, guys,
that was great," and then spend the next week
going, "Oh shit, how do I bring this back?!"
Downtime as DM between sessions is huge to try and
tie those threads back together, but you don't
want to feel like you're pushing the players back
because they went too far beyond the boundary,
because I think that goes against the-- The nature
of what makes D&D so special is the fact that you
can essentially push in any direction and not find
an invisible barrier and run off the corner like a
bad Resident Evil character. So yeah. I don't
think there was ever a point where I felt like it
wasn't going to work. There were definitely many
points where I was like, "I have no idea what's
going to happen," and the session ends, and I'm
like, "All right, I got homework! Good game, guys,
good game."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Another chocolate-related
question: my mom's also from Kentucky, and I took
up the tradition of making bourbon balls.
MARISHA: Uhh.
MATT: We do have a signing tomorrow. I don't think
she'll say no to that, you are doing the lord's work.
MATT: That is fantastic.
MARISHA: (chocolate-anticipatory gibberish)
MATT: Guys, thank you all so much for coming to
our Critical Role panel.
(cheering)
MATT: We're not worthy! Never enough time for all
the questions, but like I said, please bring them
to other panels. We'll be happy to answer them,
and to the confusion of everybody else in the
panel room, that's even better. But anyway, have a
wonderful night, drink well, game well, enjoy, and
we'll see you guys throughout the weekend!
(cheering)
[elevator music]